6.0 English
From BBCLearningEnglish.com
Hello, this is 6 minute English from BBCLearningEnglish.
I'm Pippa and I'm Beth.
In English, what we say and what we mean are sometimes two very different things.
We often use exaggeration for emphasis or for humour, something known as hyperbally.
For example, people say I am so hungry I could eat a horse, but of course no one really could.
Here's presenter Michael Rosen and linguist Derek Bowsfield discussing one example of hyperbally
on BBC Radio 4's word of mouth.
People do say absolutely not me.
Yeah, or as my daughters would say, I've had a mare today.
I want to say a mare which is obviously shortened from nightmare.
What it basically means is they've had a mild and potentially slightly humorous occurrence at work.
You might call an unpleasant or difficult experience and nightmare.
Derek's daughter used the word mare short for nightmare to describe her terrible day at work,
but she was exaggerating.
Her day wasn't really terrible.
More like strange or annoying.
Can you remember a time when what you said wasn't really what you meant, Beth?
Well, sometimes we say hi, you're right, which means hi.
Are you all right?
Right.
Are you okay, but actually we don't really want to hear the answer.
It just means hello, doesn't it?
Yeah, I have a friend who actually just says all right.
And they just mean hello.
They don't mean are you okay?
They don't want to hear about my day.
No.
If you're having a bad day, they don't want to know.
They're just saying hello.
In this episode, we'll be finding out more about how the meaning of words changes in English.
As usual, we'll be learning some useful new words and phrases.
And remember, you'll find all the vocabulary from this episode on our website, BBCLearningEnglish.com.
But first, I have a question for you, Beth.
The word hyperbally comes from two ancient Greek words, who per and value.
But what is their literal meaning?
Is it A to overthrow?
B to over speak?
Or C to over think?
I have no idea, Piper.
I'm going to say to over speak.
Okay, we'll find out the answer at the end of the program.
It's not just hyperbally that changes the meaning of words.
It's opposite, something called understatement has the same effect too.
Understatement involves de-entrecising something.
For example, imagine you were served an awful meal in a restaurant.
But instead of saying how bad the feed was, you just said it was less than perfect.
Here's linguist Derek Bousefield discussing understatement on BBC Radio Falls, Word of mouth.
We love understatement as a way of signalling that something much more serious has gone on.
It's a kind of performative, sadonic, not taking oneself too seriously identity when you do that.
Because taking yourself too seriously is a no-knowing British culture.
And so linguistically not taking yourself too seriously is really the done thing.
Understatement is valued in British culture, unlike taking yourself too seriously.
If you take yourself too seriously, you think you're more important than you really are.
In Britain, this is a no-know, a way of behaving that is not socially acceptable.
In other words, it's not the done thing.
Meaning it's not what you're expected to do in a particular social situation.
Another area where the meaning of words can be easily misunderstood is apologizing.
Here, Michael Rosen responds to an imaginary situation where his toe gets accidentally stepped on by Derek Bousefield for BBC Radio 4 program, Word of mouth.
Imagine I stepped on your toe.
And I said, oh, Michael, I'm really sorry. And you said, it's all good.
Oh, right. That probably means he isn't.
Yes, I'm actually a bit myth, a little bit annoyed, but then I don't want to have a barney with you. You're a stranger.
So I don't want to get into a whole thing. So I say, yeah, it's all good.
It's all good. Exactly. It's a bit like, yeah, I mean, that's a British English one of the equivalent American English one would be no worries.
If someone tells you it's all good, they could actually be feeling myth and adjective meaning slightly annoyed or hurt by someone's behavior.
But no matter how annoyed you are, you probably don't want to get into a barney, a loud argument or quarrel.
So you say something like, it's all good or no worries and move on.
As an English learner, unclear word meanings are a challenge.
A lot depends on the situation and on the relationship between speaker and listener.
So don't be shy, get talking to others in English.
And if you make a mistake, say no worries and carry on.
Okay, Piper, I think it's time to reveal the answer to your question.
Yes, you thought the ancient Greek words, Huper and Balo meant over speak, but the answer was actually a to overthrow.
Huper means beyond and Balo means I throw. Oh well.
Okay, let's recap the vocabulary we've learned, starting with Mare, short for nightmare, meaning an unpleasant or difficult experience.
If you take yourself too seriously, you consider yourself and your actions more important than they really are.
In Britain, this is a no-no, a way of behaving that is not socially acceptable.
The done thing on the other hand is what you are expected to do in a particular social situation.
If you're a myth, you're slightly annoyed by someone's behavior.
And finally, a Barney is allowed argument or quarrel.
Once again, our six minutes are up, but if you're keen to practice these new words and phrases, then check out our website,
BBCLearningEnglish.com where you'll find a worksheet and quiz for this episode.
See you again soon, but for now, goodbye. Bye.
6-0 English from BBCLearningEnglish.com